SCHOOLTOOL GUI GUIDE
====================

Server Settings (login) dialog pops up on start, you can choose the
server, port to connect to and the user/password to use.  This dialog
can be accessed via Setting->Server menu item.

What you see after logging in is the main SchoolTool window it is
divided into three panes: the group tree, members pane for a selected
group, and the relationships pane.


ORG STRUCTURE
-------------

You can create new persons and groups using the File->New Person and
File->New Group menu items.

A group or person can be added to a parent group by selecting the
parent group in the tree, then right-clicking in its relationships
pane, choosing Add Member or Add Subgroup, and choosing a new member
from the appearing list of persons or groups respectively.

The member can be removed by breaking the membership relationship from
either side by choosing the "Remove Relationship" from the context
menu of a relationship.


ABSENCE TRACKING
----------------

Roll calls can be run on all the groups by right-clicking on a group
in the tree and choosing "Roll Call" in the context menu.  The roll
call dialog lists all persons in a group and presents a choice present
or absent, and a facility to add a comment.

Absences of persons can be viewed by right-clicking on a person in the
Members pane and choosing "View Absences".  Every absence can consist
of several absence comments.

Every group can have an absence tracker, to receive and collect all
the absence events of its members.  In order to create an absence
tracker for a group, right click on a group in the tree and choose
"Absence Tracker".  Later, you can use the same menu item to view the
absences collected in the tracker.


TIMETABLES
----------

Every group or person can have a number of timetables.  First, the
timetables can vary in the timetable schema.  For instance, in a
school with a 4-day rotating timetable there might be some events
recurring weekly.  Second, there are separate timetables for different
time periods, such as semesters.

Every group or person can have a number of own timetables and a number
of composite timetables.  Own timetables consist of the events private
to a group or person, and composite timetables consist of all events
related to a group or person.  For example, a composite timetable for
a teacher will contain all the lessons they are teaching, and a
composite timetable of a pupil will contain all the events from the
private timetables of the groups the're in, in other words -- all the
lessons they need to attend.

The private and composite timetables of persons and groups can be
viewed by choosing the "View timetables" and "View composite
timetables" in the context menus for groups and persons.

The timetable can be edited by the school administrator by choosing
"View->School Timetable" menu item.  The user will be presented with a
list of possible timetables.  After choosing one, the user will be
presented with a grid listing all teachers as rows and all timetable
periods as colums.  When a cell of the timetable is double-clicked, a
dialog for editing that cell appears.  The dialog contains a
selectable list of all the groups a given teacher is teaching, and a
button for booking of resources, including venue, for a given
timetable activity.  Conflicts in a timetable (such as booking the
same resource for two activities at the same time) are represented and
no attempt is given to trying to resolve them.


CALENDARS
---------

Every group and person has two calendars: a private calendar which can
be edited and a read-only calendar formed out of the group's or
person's composite timetable.

Mozilla Calendar or a similar calendaring application has to be used
to access the calendars.  A list of all calendars, available at
http://localhost:8080/calendars.html (if the SchoolTool server is
running on localhost port 8080) can be a help in adding the calendar
to the calendaring application.


RESOURCE SEARCH AND BOOKING
---------------------------

The resource availability search dialog is accessable via the
"View->Search for Available Resources" menu item.  In that dialog, the
user can choose the resources they are interested in, the range of
dates, the hours within a day, and a minimum duration of a free period
of time.

Then, a resource can be booked by choosing the free period of time and
clicking the Book Resource button.  In the resource booking dialog,
the user has to choose the exact time and duration, the resource being
booked, and the person who is booking the resource.  Only the managers
can choose other users, teachers can choose only themselves.

When the resource is booked, an event is added to both the calendars
of the resource and of the person booking.  The booking is cancelled
if the booking event is deleted in the person's private calendar.


SECURITY
--------

There are three kinds of users:  Pupils, Teachers, and Managers.
Mostly, pupils can only view the information on the server, teachers
can additionaly run roll calls and book resources, and the managers
can edit all information.

The username for a user is set when the user is created and cannot be
changed.  The password can be changed by the user themselves or a
manager by right-clicking on a user and choosing "Change Password".
